Create RELEASE.md for release docs (#664)
connectrpc/connect-go: RELEASE.md

# Releasing connect-go

This document outlines how to create a release of connect-go.

1. Clone the repo, ensuring you have the latest main.

2. On a new branch, open [connect.go](connect.go) and change the `Version` constant. Do not just remove the `-dev` suffix: look at the release history and the unreleased commits to choose a new semantic version number.

   ```patch
   -const Version = "1.14.0-dev"
   +const Version = "1.14.0"
   ```

> 4. Open a PR titled "Prepare for vX.Y.Z" ([Example PR #661](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/pull/661)). Once it's reviewed and CI passes, merge it. *Make sure no new commits are merged until the release is complete.*

Reviewer: Need to emphasize this a bit more. Adding it to its own line at least. Could consider using an [important callout note](https://github.com/orgs/community/discussions/16925)

```suggestion
4. Open a PR titled "Prepare for vX.Y.Z" ([Example PR #661](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/pull/661)). Once it's reviewed and CI passes, merge it.

   *Make sure no new commits are merged until the release is complete.*
```

Author: Important note can't be indented into the list, so have chosen to go with the separate paragraph.

5. Using the Github UI, create a new release.
    - Under “Choose a tag”, type in “vX.Y.Z” to create a new tag for the release upon publish.
    - Target the main branch.
    - Title the Release “vX.Y.Z”.
    - Click “set as latest release”.
    - Set the last version as the “Previous tag”.
    - Click “Generate release notes” to autogenerate release notes, sort them into ### Enhancements and ### Bugfixes, and edit the PR titles to be meaningful to end users. Feel free to collect multiple small changes to docs or Github config into one line, but try to tag every contributor. Make especially sure to credit new external contributors!

6. Publish the release.

7. Take the newly created release, click on the button to edit the release, and then update the release. See this [issue](https://github.com/orgs/community/discussions/8226) for guidelines.

> 

Reviewer: Let's move this to the end and frame it more like, "Check the releases page to see if releases are out of order. If they are, first take the release you just did, click on the button to edit the release, and then update the release. If that doesn't work, contact GitHub support (link) and explain the problem to them. They can trigger a re-index."

Author: I linked to the disucssions. Not sure what link is for github support if that is what you meant?

# Releasing connect-go

This document outlines how to create a release of connect-go.

1. Clone the repo, ensuring you have the latest main.

> 2. On a new branch, open [connect.go](connect.go) and change the `Version` constant. Do not just remove the `-dev` suffix: look at the release history and the unreleased commits to choose a new semantic version number.

Author: This confused me: with the version at `1.14.0-dev` we should have chosen a patch release of `1.13.1` instead of the `1.14.0` release as no API changes were made. I think we need to explain the reasoning around why we default to increasing the minor first over increasing on removing the suffix. As an aside it's more difficult to know what the current version is without going through the git history (checking releases). In contrast protobuf-go will use append the suffix without incrementing: https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf-go/commit/9f73929456f40461a01f2375d7dbf875126bd6ce . What's the benefit over incrementing the minor with the dev suffix for anticipating the release?

Reviewer: My suggestion would be:
1. Update the wording here such that you wouldn't have been confused given the historical and current behavior.
2. After we land this PR, we can debate whether to change the practice. FWIW, my instinct would be to do what protobuf-go does for a new repo, but that is something for maintainers to debate/decide.

Author: > Check for MINOR or PATCH changes. On MINOR confirm the current version by removing the `-dev` suffix. On PATCH look through the release history and increment the latest patch of the previous minor release.

Reviewer: What do you think of this? I would have also liked to include a sample diff for each case, but I can't do that as a GitHub suggestion since it would require putting a \``` block inside of a \``` block
```suggestion
2. On a new branch, open [connect.go](connect.go) and change the `Version` constant to an appropriate [semantic version](https://semver.org/) given the changes that are being released.
  * If there are only bug fixes and no new features, remove the `-dev` suffix and set the version number equal to the latest release with the PATCH component incremented by 1.
  * If the new release includes features, remove the `-dev` suffix, set the MINOR number to be 1 more than the MINOR number of the latest release, and zero out the PATCH number. In the common case, the diff here will just be to remove the `-dev` suffix.
```

Author: I think it's important to highlight the latest release is not the current one in the `Version` name.  `to the latest release with the PATCH component incremented by 1` should say something about finding the release like the current `look at the release history`.

Reviewer: what about this?
```suggestion
2. On a new branch, open [connect.go](connect.go) and change the `Version` constant to an appropriate [semantic version](https://semver.org/). To select the correct version, look at the version number of the [latest release](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/releases/latest) and the changes that are included in this new release.
  * If there are only bug fixes and no new features, remove the `-dev` suffix, set MINOR number to be equal to the [latest release](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/releases/latest), and set the PATCH number to be 1 more than the PATCH number of the [latest release](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/releases/latest).
  * If there are features being released, remove the `-dev` suffix, set the MINOR number to be 1 more than the MINOR number of the [latest release](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/releases/latest), and set the PATCH number to `0`. In the common case, the diff here will just be to remove the `-dev` suffix.
```

   ```patch
   -const Version = "1.14.0-dev"
   +const Version = "1.14.0"
   ```

> 3. Check for changes in [cmd/protoc-gen-connect-go/main.go](cmd/protoc-gen-connect-go/main.go) to use an appropriate version restriction that matches the current release. A constant `IsAtLeastVersionX_Y_Z` should be defined in [connect.go](connect.go) if generated code has begun using a new API. Update as required ([Example PR #496](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/pull/496)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Check [cmd/protoc-gen-connect-go/main.go](cmd/protoc-gen-connect-go/main.go) to ensure that if a new `IsAtLeastVersionX_Y_Z` constant was added since the last release, it is the same version number that you are currently releasing. If a new constant was added since the last release but it doesn't have the same version number as what you are about to release, then update the name to match the version you are about to release. [Example PR #496](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/pull/496).
```

Reviewer 2: I think this might deviate from the intent a bit - I might read these instructions and add a new constant all the time, as part of doing a release. In general, adding new constants is an exception not a rule. I don't have a good suggestion here though.

Reviewer: What was the intent of the existing Notion doc if not what I suggested here?
I agree with Ed from earlier comment thread that a constant like this should get introduced in the original PR, not the release PR.

In any case, if we agree that constants like this are rare, and the error we are checking here for is rarer, then I think it is ok to delete this step from the release process.

Author: I think the `if a new IsAtLeastVersionX_Y_Z` is not quite right as they might have forgotten to add the version restriction. We need to check `main.go` for any use of connect-go that would fail in a surprising way if the version restriction wasn't added. The wording from protobuf-go: https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf-go/blob/9f73929456f40461a01f2375d7dbf875126bd6ce/internal/version/version.go#L29-L31

What about:

> Check for any new changes to the generator in [cmd/protoc-gen-connect-go/main.go](cmd/protoc-gen-connect-go/main.go) that rely on new functionality in the library. If present, ensure a new constant `IsAtLeastVersionX_Y_Z` has been defined in [connect.go](connect.go) that matches the current release. Update as needed ([Example PR #496](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/pull/496)).

Reviewer: > We need to check main.go for any use of connect-go that would fail in a surprising way if the version restriction wasn't added.

I think this reduces to the person doing the release needs to code review all changes that have landed, which, imo, is not something we should be asking the person doing the release to do. The best time to catch whether a new constant needs to be added is in the PR that introduces the change. The only thing thing the release person should do, if anything, is ensure the actual release number matches the expected release number at the time the constant was added (which is the docs that I am suggestion).

If we DO want the person doing the release to effectively code review all changes to look for whether `IsAtLeastVersionX_Y_Z` has been correctly added or not, then I like the wording in Ed's most recent comment:

> Check for any new changes to the generator in [cmd/protoc-gen-connect-go/main.go](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/pull/cmd/protoc-gen-connect-go/main.go) that rely on new functionality in the library. If present, ensure a new constant IsAtLeastVersionX_Y_Z has been defined in [connect.go](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/pull/connect.go) that matches the current release. Update as needed (https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/pull/496).

Reviewer: I updated my original suggestion to try to make it more clear this is a rare case. I think we should apply this suggestion and have @jhump review this.

4. Open a PR titled "Prepare for vX.Y.Z" ([Example PR #661](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/pull/661)). Once it's reviewed and CI passes, merge it.

    *Make sure no new commits are merged until the release is complete.*

5. Using the Github UI, create a new release.
    - Under “Choose a tag”, type in “vX.Y.Z” to create a new tag for the release upon publish.
    - Target the main branch.
    - Title the Release “vX.Y.Z”.
    - Click “set as latest release”.
    - Set the last version as the “Previous tag”.
    - Click “Generate release notes” to autogenerate release notes, sort them into ### Enhancements and ### Bugfixes, and edit the PR titles to be meaningful to end users. Feel free to collect multiple small changes to docs or Github config into one line, but try to tag every contributor. Make especially sure to credit new external contributors!

6. Publish the release.

7. On a new branch, open [connect.go](connect.go) and change the `Version` to increment the minor tag and append the `-dev` suffix. Use the next minor release - we never anticipate bugs and patch releases.

   ```patch
   -const Version = "1.14.0"
   +const Version = "1.15.0-dev"
   ```

> 8. Open a PR titled "Back to developement" ([Example PR #662](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/pull/662)). Once it's reviewed and CI passes, merge it.

Reviewer 2: Typo

# Releasing connect-go

This document outlines how to create a release of connect-go.

1. Clone the repo, ensuring you have the latest main.

2. On a new branch, open [connect.go](connect.go) and change the `Version` constant to an appropriate [semantic version](https://semver.org/). To select the correct version, look at the version number of the [latest release](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/releases/latest) and the changes that are included in this new release.

>   * If there are only bug fixes and no new features, remove the `-dev` suffix, set MINOR number to be equal to the [latest release](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/releases/latest), and set the PATCH number to be 1 more than the PATCH number of the [latest release](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/releases/latest).

Reviewer 3: Probably a good case for using a footnote for the link target, so you don't have to repeat it.

Author: I think this is better as a link than a footnote. Footnote usually have a note for explanation but here we just want to link to the release notes. Left as is (@nicksnyder)

Reviewer 3: I didn't mean to make it _not_ a link. I meant to use footnote style to define the link target, so you don't have to repeat it. See how this is done in the README: https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/blob/main/README.md?plain=1#L170-L185

Author: TIL: didn't know footnotes could be used like links. Thanks

Reviewer: fine with me, I don't care

  * If there are features being released, remove the `-dev` suffix, set the MINOR number to be 1 more than the MINOR number of the [latest release](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/releases/latest), and set the PATCH number to `0`. In the common case, the diff here will just be to remove the `-dev` suffix.

   ```patch
   -const Version = "1.14.0-dev"
   +const Version = "1.14.0"
   ```

> 3. Check [cmd/protoc-gen-connect-go/main.go](cmd/protoc-gen-connect-go/main.go) to see if a new `IsAtLeastVersionX_Y_Z` constant was added since the [latest release](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/releases/latest). If one was added (this is rare), ensure that the version number matches the version number that you are currently releasing. If it doesn't match, update the name to match the version you are about to release. [Example PR #496](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/pull/496).

Reviewer 3: The old notion doc had directions for _adding_ this constant if it was needed (but not already added). I think that's still a useful step -- one last chance to catch such a change before accidentally releasing _without_ a new constant and inadvertently breaking people.

Author: I've reworded this back to checking for changes.

4. Open a PR titled "Prepare for vX.Y.Z" ([Example PR #661](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/pull/661)). Once it's reviewed and CI passes, merge it.

>     *Make sure no new commits are merged until the release is complete.*

Reviewer 3: This one's a bit tricky. I think we may want to actually tag _all_ maintainers in the "prepare" PR, to tell them to not approve/merge any commits until the "back to dev" PR lands.

Author: I've updated 4. to say that the description of the PR should tag all current maintainers.

> 5. Using the Github UI, create a new release.

Reviewer 3: An earlier step that would be nice is to first review all commits in the new release and, for each PR, go label it appropriately and re-title the PRs so that the auto-generated release notes are as close to final as possible. It's effectively the same work as editing the release notes, just doing it before the auto-generation step instead of after.

Author: Created an earlier step for the PR label and re-title. And modified the last step of this to highlight it should be a slight edit to regroup or add categories that don't have labels.

6. Publish the release.

7. On a new branch, open [connect.go](connect.go) and change the `Version` to increment the minor tag and append the `-dev` suffix. Use the next minor release - we never anticipate bugs and patch releases.

   ```patch
   -const Version = "1.14.0"
   +const Version = "1.15.0-dev"
   ```

8. Open a PR titled "Back to development" ([Example PR #662](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/pull/662)). Once it's reviewed and CI passes, merge it.

9. Check the [releases](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/releases) page to see if [releases are out of order](https://github.com/orgs/community/discussions/8226). If they are, take the release you just did, click on the button to edit the release, and then update the release. If that doesn't work, [contact GitHub support](https://support.github.com/contact?tags=rr-general-technical) to request that they trigger a re-index of the repository:

   > Subject: connect-go releases appearing out of order
   >

>    > The [connect-go releases page](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/releases) is showing releases out of order. I have tried editing the most recent release to trigger a re-index and it doesn't seem to have resolved the issue. Can you please trigger a re-index for this repo? Thanks!

Reviewer 3: Does this really happen often enough that it needs to be in the release directions? I know it happened in a few repositories recently, but it could have been a since-fixed bug in GitHub.

Author: @nicksnyder what do you think about removing this with the hope it's no longer an issue?

Reviewer: I am fine removing this

Author: Removed.

# Releasing connect-go

This document outlines how to create a release of connect-go.

1. Clone the repo, ensuring you have the latest main.

2. On a new branch, open [connect.go](connect.go) and change the `Version` constant to an appropriate [semantic version](https://semver.org/). To select the correct version, look at the version number of the [latest release] and the changes that are included in this new release.
  * If there are only bug fixes and no new features, remove the `-dev` suffix, set MINOR number to be equal to the [latest release], and set the PATCH number to be 1 more than the PATCH number of the [latest release].
  * If there are features being released, remove the `-dev` suffix, set the MINOR number to be 1 more than the MINOR number of the [latest release], and set the PATCH number to `0`. In the common case, the diff here will just be to remove the `-dev` suffix.

   ```patch
   -const Version = "1.14.0-dev"
   +const Version = "1.14.0"
   ```

> 3. Check for any changes in [cmd/protoc-gen-connect-go/main.go](cmd/protoc-gen-connect-go/main.go) that require a version restriction. A constant `IsAtLeastVersionX_Y_Z` should be defined in [connect.go](connect.go) if generated code has begun to use a new API. Make sure the generated code references this constant. Update as required ([Example PR #496](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/pull/496)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Check for any changes in [cmd/protoc-gen-connect-go/main.go](cmd/protoc-gen-connect-go/main.go) that require a version restriction. A constant `IsAtLeastVersionX_Y_Z` should be defined in [connect.go](connect.go) if generated code has begun to use a new API. Make sure the generated code references this constant. If a new constant has been added since the last release, ensure that the name of the constant matches the version being released ([Example PR #496](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/pull/496)).
```

> # Release Process for `connect-go`

Reviewer: Please use title case everywhere for headings (not going to comment on every instance here)
```suggestion
# Release process for `connect-go`
```

> 

Reviewer: I think the list formatting of the notion doc made this more clear because it was a single nested list. It looks like you introduced levels of hierarchy here in this readme that don't exist in the Notion doc. I prefer how the Notion doc is formatted.

## Preparing for Release

1. **Update Version Number**

>    - In `connect.go`, modify the `Version` constant to match the target release according to [semver](https://semver.org/) standards. Remove the `-dev` suffix.

Reviewer: Anywhere we reference a file, actually link to it (here and elsewhere)
```suggestion
   - In [connect.go](connect.go), modify the `Version` constant to match the target release according to [semver](https://semver.org/) standards. Remove the `-dev` suffix.
```

     ```go
     const Version = "X.Y.Z"
     ```

> 2. **Version Requirements (Optional)**

Reviewer: This is not an optional step. You are required to check to see if the new release requires an updated version of connect-go.

Author: This step should always be done in the PR that makes the change. As an example see the new schema addition which set the requirement on v1.13.0: https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/pull/629/files#diff-82f6a0eb10c47bc6590f594adc997b5a12de370dfd735a05c44cf8ff6fbf7a12R44
Appropriate to remove this step?

Author: I've removed this step. It should never be done in the release process but it's not well documented. Would a section in this file help?

Author: Looking through the history it's not clear what the correct procedure is. For adding GET support https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/pull/478 the version tag was added for v1.6.0 after the v1.6.0 release. This was then corrected in the version release https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/pull/496 for v1.7.0. I do think the version restriction should be done in the PR landing the change as it would be easy to miss in a release. The current docs are:

3. **If the generated code has begun using a new API from the main package**:
    1. Define a new `IsAtLeastVersion_X_Y_Z` constant in `connect.go`.
    2. Change `cmd/protoc-gen-connect-go/main.go` to use the new constant.
    3. Commit with the message “Prepare for vX.Y.Z”, substituting the actual version we’re releasing.

The **if** suggests it is optional and the substep 3.3 is not dependant on changing the `main.go` as we must create a PR with the connect.go changes that has this same title.

Reviewer: Agree that best practice is for this version constant to land in the original PR and the existing docs are a bit misleading. It does seem valuable for the releaser to double check to see if any new constants have been added since the last release and to ensure they are named correctly. Basically what are the instructions we should add here that would have guided a releaser to detect the problem that was detected in [#496](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/pull/496) (aka wrong version number used).

Author: Added step 3. to check for the version restrictions if there have been changes to protoc-gen-connect-go.

   - If changes require a new API in `connect-go`, declare a constant referencing the updated code.
     ```go
     const (
         IsAtLeastVersionX_Y_Z = true
     )
     ```

>    - Ensure the generated code refers to this constant. This is used as a compile time check of source compatibilty.

Reviewer: The Notion document is more specific about how to do this (i.e. specific file to edit), and we should keep that level of specificity in the README. A sample diff/PR could be included here too.

## Creating the Release

1. **Draft a Release**
   - Navigate to the [releases](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-go/releases) page using the GitHub UI.
   - Click **Draft a new release** at the top of the page.

2. **Tagging and Title**
   - Enter “vX.Y.Z” in the "Choose a tag” field to create a new tag for the release upon publishing.
   - Target the main branch and title the release as “vX.Y.Z”.

3. **Additional Configuration**
   - Click “set as latest release” and specify the last version as the “Previous tag”.
   - Use **Generate release notes** to auto-create meaningful release notes, sorting them into `### Enhancements` and `### Bugfixes`. Ensure contributors are credited, especially new external contributors.

4. **Publishing the Release**
   - When ready, click **Publish release**.
   - For proper sorting, edit and update the newly created release. See this [issue](https://github.com/orgs/community/discussions/8226) for guidelines.

## Returning to Development

1. **Update for Development**
   - In `connect.go`, modify the `Version` constant to the next minor release with the suffix `-dev`.
     ```go

>      const Version = "X.Y+1.0-dev"

Reviewer: I think including an example PR would be more effective

Author: Included examples of the latest release.
